Adding Initial Charter for Contributor Strategy (#370)
cncf/toc: sigs/contributor-strategy.md

# CNCF SIG Contributor Strategy Charter

Primary Authors: Paris Pittman, Josh Berkus  

> Not approved // needs a TOC vote

Author: heh thanks :)

Reviewed and/or contributed to by:  
* Matt Klein
* Matt Farina  
* Carolyn Van Slyck  
* April Nassi
* Matt Jarvis
* Gerred Dillon
* Ken Owens
* Cheryl Hung
* Amye Scavarda Perrin
* Ihor Dvoretskyi

## Introduction
This charter describes the operations of the CNCF Special Interest Group (SIG)
Contributor Strategy. This SIG is responsible for contributor experience,
sustainability, governance, and openness guidance to help CNCF community groups
and projects with their own contributor strategies for a healthy project.

Our initial three stakeholders:  
1 - CNCF projects and their contributors/maintainers,  
2 - End Users in the broader community and member companies,  
3 - TOC

## Mission
Consistent with the CNCF SIG definition, the mission of CNCF SIG Contributor

> Strategy is to collaborate on strategies related to building, scaling, and

Reviewer: I love this initiative!  Just a bit on wording... I'd like to see a mission that is a bit more active, perhaps tied to CNCF mission. What does success look like?  I think this effort will drive a healthy ecosystem and increase growth/retention. Of course, it will require participation of the projects and if the SIG is doing all the right things (which from everything I hear you are on track to do) then projects will be eager to participate / take advantage of resources provided by this SIG.

Reviewer 2: Any suggestions on wording?  You seem to have grasped what we'll be doing, what would be a better way to phrase this?

Author: I added a suggested line but may not be enough - let me know what you think:
> Consistent with the CNCF SIG definition, the mission of CNCF SIG Contributor Strategy is to collaborate on strategies related to building, scaling, and retaining contributor communities, including (people) governance, communications, operations, and tools. _We want to help grow flourishing, sustainable communities with smooth journeys throughout their CNCF project lifecycle._
To do that we will:

Author: You might know where I'm going with 'smooth journeys' but I don't think that would be good as final

retaining contributor communities, including (people) governance, communications,

> operations, and tools. To do that we will:

Author: done

establishing guidelines, programs, and workflows.
* “Contributing health checks”/’community health checks’ (name tbd) for project
evaluations at graduation time.
* Webinars, meetings, and other events to engage with the end user community on
upstream contributing trainings and engagement programs.  
* Development of guidelines, documents for project governance, recruiting and
retaining contributor communities, mentorship, and project maturity.
* Collection of current state of contributor strategies and governance models
via surveys, GB reps, and Maintainers Circle (Example: what is the project doing
  now, challenges, gaps)

#### Out of scope
* The day to day operations of CNCF SIGs, Kubernetes SIGs, or any community group
of CNCF or its respective projects of any graduation level.
* The creation and approval of CNCF SIGs or other community groups; we will offer advice but the responsibility lies on the TOC for those matters.
* CNCF operations and marketing initiatives such as: product review/demo
webinars, kubecon event planning, branding, stickers, swag, etc
* Licensing and legal matters
* Testing

## Roadmap
###1) SIG Formation:

> Role creation

Reviewer: Any particular roles?  (e.g.  is this the TOC-specified roles of chair/tech lead, or more like [SIG-Security roles](https://github.com/cncf/sig-security/blob/master/governance/roles.md) which I would have described as "define how SIG members will step up to lead specific projects to accomplish our mission and facilitate the activities of the SIG" or something like that

Author: I went with the TOC-specified roles but after reviewing yours, I think we can use a ton of it. Lets see what others say.

Stakeholder reps recruited and identified  

> ###2) Discovery:

Reviewer: Suggest adding an intro phrase here about *what* you are discovering, such as "Discover actionable problem areas and key challenges ..." and/or "identify projects that have a maintainer or contributor that want to engage with the SIG"...

Author: ty for the suggestion - added some things and more context. ptal.

with CNCF SIGs, projects, and end user community for contributor best practices,
gaps/needs, current operations/programs, what hasn’t worked, etc.  

###3) Establish working groups
Create them from discovery or already known gaps while #2 is ongoing. Examples
include:  
1. Maintainers Circle
2. Contributor growth and outreach: docs, diversity, recruitment, retention
 * includes modern mentoring, succession planning, and staffing contributor role strategies
3. "Community/Contributor health check"
  * evaluation criteria  
  * check-in/review/consulting process  
4. Open governance guidelines and governance operations best practices
  * the why, how, and where, your contributors make decisions  
  * contributor diversity

*Possible future roadmap projects*  
If you see something here that interests you, join us and start it:  
* Training: leadership, code of conduct, code reviewing, etc  
* Contributor metrics and definitions  
* Automation and self service for contributors, community GitOps

## Governance
This SIGs topic requires cross collaboration between end users, CNCF SIGs, and
CNCF projects of all graduation levels.

> This SIG should be populated and governed by reps from CNCF projects that want

Reviewer: Are you saying that if someone is not representing a CNCF project that you would not want them in a leadership role?  This might exclude experts in this area that may be interested in helping but are new to the CNCF, which is ok, just want to be clear.  You could always steer those folks to volunteer with a project first, but could lose some independent cross-project / ecosystem visibility.

Reviewer 2: You know, that was a possibility that we didn't discuss at all, because it didn't occur to us that anyone who wasn't already involved with cncf projects would be interested.  We'll have to hash that out at the next meeting.

Reviewer 3: I think from a scope and TOC perspective, we may still want to focus on CNCF projects from the scope of SIG Contributor Strategy. The TOC's mission is still oriented around those projects, and the SIG is a body of the TOC. I'd defer to the TOC on that scope, but while we shouldn't be kingmakers, we should still assist the TOC in their mission -- and SIG contributor strategy in that part is about projects that are part of the CNCF and aiding the TOC and GB in supporting them.

Reviewer 3: Although, I do agree @ultrasaurus that leadership shouldn't be dependent on existing CNCF project leadership.

Reviewer 3: I just want to make sure that this SIG is focused on empowering CNCF projects, as is from what I understood of the charter. Not to be kingmakers - but part of this SIG would be to help projects and maintainers on their journey from (this may be different depending on project):

* enter the CNCF at the sandbox stage
* move to incubating
* move to graduated

and have resources along the way. while I think anyone should be able to join, we need to keep our focus clear.

Author: I added a general sentiment around welcoming industry experts; ptal. i'm mostly open to the idea if they have relevant experience, especially building contributor bases and governance for other oss projects that we can learn from. i think bootstrap leadership may make sense with reps from cncf sigs/cncf projects only to assess and kick things off.

Reviewer 4: I agree with @gerred - I prefer that the SIG members and leaders be made up of people active with CNCF projects. We can certainly have outside experts offer insight, etc as needed, but I feel that should be as a resource, not a member. It's similar to how our OSS projects function - all are welcome but a level of engagement/involvement is needed before taking a leadership role. I don't think being active with/in a CNCF project is a barrier here.

Reviewer 3: :+1:

contributors and end users. We welcome industry experts and academics in relevant working groups!

Conduct public monthly meetings as a large group and working groups that form will
have their own meetings. (see #Meetings and Decisions for more)

Check in with the TOC on a monthly basis for a quick overview and challenges
during a public TOC meeting.

### Members

Members are active participants in the work of the SIG who are entitled to vote
in any SIG decisions that require a vote.  Any contributor to the SIG is
eligible to become a member after participating in the work of the SIG for at
least three months.

In order to prevent the SIG from becoming unbalanced, it will have the following
limits on who can be a voting member:

Up to one from each participating Incubating or Sandbox CNCF project
Up to two from each Graduated CNCF project
One from each SIG-ContribStrat Working Group, generally the lead for that WG
No more than ⅓ of members from the same employer

If a contributor would be entitled to be a member, but are restricted because of
the above limits, they are a non-voting member who may participate in meetings

> by cannot vote.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
but cannot vote.
```

Members who are no longer participating actively in the SIG (including both WG
  work and the regular meetings) will step down from membership.

#### Chairs and TOC Liaison

- TOC Liaison:  

> - Chairs:  

Reviewer 5: Would be good to explicitly note that this SIG doesn't have [Tech Leads](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/sigs/cncf-sigs.md#sig-formation-leadership-and-membership-composition)

In accordance with the terms and roles laid out in [cncf-sigs.md](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/sigs/cncf-sigs.md)

At least one member or contributor is elected to report the SIG's decisions and
activities to the TOC by an annual preference vote of the current members.  This

> person is known as the "TOC Liaison".

Reviewer 5: Terminology could be confusing here. For other SIGs a [TOC Liaison](https://github.com/cncf/toc/tree/master/sigs#current-sigs) is a member of the TOC who works with that SIG (btw we don't have a written down definition of that role yet, but we should)

> The TOC will also appoint 2-3 Chairs to run the operations

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The TOC will appoint 3 [Chairs](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/sigs/cncf-sigs.md#chair) 
```

# CNCF SIG Contributor Strategy Charter

Primary Authors: Paris Pittman, Josh Berkus  

Not approved // needs a TOC vote

Reviewed and/or contributed to by:  
* Matt Klein
* Matt Farina  
* Carolyn Van Slyck  
* April Nassi
* Matt Jarvis
* Gerred Dillon
* Ken Owens
* Cheryl Hung
* Amye Scavarda Perrin
* Ihor Dvoretskyi

## Introduction
This charter describes the operations of the CNCF Special Interest Group (SIG)
Contributor Strategy. This SIG is responsible for contributor experience,
sustainability, governance, and openness guidance to help CNCF community groups
and projects with their own contributor strategies for a healthy project.

Our initial three stakeholders:  
CNCF projects and their contributors/maintainers,  
End Users in the broader community and member companies,  

> TOC

Reviewer 6: missing bullets?

> TOC

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our initial three stakeholders:  
* CNCF projects and their contributors/maintainers,  
* End Users in the broader community and member companies,  
* TOC
```

prospective new projects by developing community graduation criteria check
points for rolling feedback and guidance.
* Educate and Engage. Providing guidance to end users on how to engage with
 contributors and vice versa.

#### In scope:
The following, non exhaustive, bootstrap list of activities and deliverables are
in-scope for the SIG:
* Definition of a contributor. This is helpful across projects for metrics and
establishing guidelines, programs, and workflows.
* “Contributing health checks”/’community health checks’ (name tbd) for project
evaluations at graduation time.
* Webinars, meetings, and other events to engage with the end user community on
upstream contributing trainings and engagement programs.  
* Development of guidelines, documents for project governance, recruiting and
retaining contributor communities, mentorship, and project maturity.
* Collection of current state of contributor strategies and governance models
via surveys, GB reps, and Maintainers Circle (Example: what is the project doing
  now, challenges, gaps)

#### Out of scope
* The day to day operations of CNCF SIGs, Kubernetes SIGs, or any community group

> of CNCF or it’s respective projects of any graduation level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of CNCF or its respective projects of any graduation level.
```

* The creation and approval of CNCF SIGs or other community groups, though we may
help propose or suggest but the responsibility lies on the TOC for those

> matters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The creation and approval of CNCF SIGs or other community groups; we will offer advice but the responsibility lies on the TOC for those matters.
```

* CNCF operations and marketing initiatives such as: product review/demo
webinars, kubecon event planning, branding, stickers, swag, etc
* Licensing and legal matters
* Testing

## Roadmap

> #1 SIG Formation:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
###1) SIG Formation:
```

Role creation
Stakeholder reps recruited and identified  

> #2 Discovery:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
###2) Discovery:
```

with CNCF SIGs, projects, and end user community for contributor best practices,
gaps/needs, current operations/programs, what hasn’t worked, etc.  

> #3 Establish working groups from discovery or already known gaps while #2 is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
###3) Establish working groups from discovery or already known gaps while #2 is
```

> going. Examples include:  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
###3) Establish working groups 
Create them from discovery or already known gaps while #2 is going. Examples include:  
```

1. Maintainers Circle
2. Contributor growth and outreach: docs, diversity, recruitment, retention
 * includes modern mentoring, succession planning, and staffing contributor role strategies
3. "Community/Contributor health check"
  * evaluation criteria  
  * check-in/review/consulting process  
4. Open governance guidelines and governance operations best practices
  * the why, how, and

> where, your contributors make decisions  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * the why, how, and where your contributors make decisions  
```

  * contributor diversity

Possible future roadmap projects  
//if you see something here that interests you, join us and start it:  
Training: leadership, code of conduct  
Contributor metrics and definitions  

> Automation and self service for contributors, community GitOps

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you see something here that interests you, join us and start it:  
* Training: leadership, code of conduct  
* Contributor metrics and definitions  
* Automation and self service for contributors, community GitOps
```

the above limits, they are a non-voting member who may participate in meetings
by cannot vote.

Members who are no longer participating actively in the SIG (including both WG
  work and the regular meetings) will step down from membership.

#### Chairs and TOC Liaison

- TOC Liaison:  
- Chairs:  

In accordance with the terms and roles laid out in [cncf-sigs.md](https://github.com/cncf/toc/blob/master/sigs/cncf-sigs.md) 

At least one member or contributor is elected to report the SIG's decisions and
activities to the TOC by an annual preference vote of the current members.  This
person is known as the "TOC Liaison".

The TOC will also appoint 2-3 Chairs to run the operations

### Meetings and Decisions

Most SIG work will be carried out without requiring any kind of regular meeting
or vote.   The SIG will have a regular meeting, initially monthly, at which the
membership may vote on the following items as the come up:

Addition of new members or removal of inactive ones
Approval of new working groups and retirement of completed/inactive ones
Approval of reports to be delivered to the TOC
Approval of formal recommendations to a CNCF project or about that project to
the TOC

> Approval or deprecation of guidelines and documents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Addition of new members or removal of inactive ones
* Approval of new working groups and retirement of completed/inactive ones
* Approval of reports to be delivered to the TOC
* Approval of formal recommendations to a CNCF project or about that project to
the TOC
* Approval or deprecation of guidelines and documents
```
